Gutenberg Data Tutorial 5: Adding a Delete Button (#40940)
WordPress/gutenberg: docs/how-to-guides/data-basics/5-adding-a-delete-button.md

```js
function MyFirstApp() {
	const [searchTerm, setSearchTerm] = useState( '' );
	const { pages, hasResolved } = useSelect(
		( select ) => {
			const query = {};
			if ( searchTerm ) {
				query.search = searchTerm;
			}
			const isDeletingPage = page => select( coreDataStore ).isDeletingEntityRecord('postType', 'page', page.id );
			const selectorArgs = ['postType', 'page', query];
			const pages = (
				select( coreDataStore )
				  .getEntityRecords( ...selectorArgs )
				  ?.filter( page => ! isDeletingPage( page ) )
			);
			return {
				pages,
				hasResolved: select( coreDataStore ).hasFinishedResolution(
					'getEntityRecords',
					selectorArgs,
				),
			};
		},
		[searchTerm],
	);
	// ...
}
```

Once you apply the change above, the pages will disappear from the list right after the user clicks the _Delete_ button.

And that's it!

### Wiring it all together

All the pieces are in place, great! Here’s all the changes we've made in this chapter:

```js
import { useDispatch } from '@wordpress/data';
import { useEffect } from '@wordpress/element';
import { Button, Modal, TextControl } from '@wordpress/components';

function MyFirstApp() {

> 	const [searchTerm, setSearchTerm] = useState( '' );

Reviewer: Small nitpick but we should add `useState` to the imports above.

Author: I initially didn't because it's imported in the previous part of the tutorial. Now that I think about it again, it would make more sense to make this behavior explicit 👍

Author: Done @ryanwelcher

> 	const { pages, hasResolved } = useSelect(

Reviewer: Same with `useSelect`

		</Button>
	);
}
```

Here's what it looks like in action:

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/WordPress/gutenberg/HEAD/docs/how-to-guides/data-basics/media/delete-button/deleting-in-progress.png)

### Step 4: Handle errors

We optimistically assumed that a *delete* operation would always succeed. Unfortunately, under the hood, it is a REST API request that can fail in many ways:

* The website can be down
* The update may be invalid
* The page could have been deleted by someone else in the meantime

To tell the user when any of these happens, we need to extract the error information using the `getLastEntityDeleteError` selector:

```js
// Replace 9 with an actual page ID
wp.data.select( 'core' ).getLastEntityDeleteError( 'postType', 'page', 9 )
```

Here's how we can apply it in `DeletePageButton`:

```js
import { useEffect } from '@wordpress/element';
const DeletePageButton = ({ pageId }) => {
	// ...
	const { error, /* ... */ } = useSelect(
		select => ( {
			error: select( coreDataStore ).getLastEntityDeleteError( 'postType', 'page', pageId ),
			// ...
		} ),
		[pageId]
	);
	useEffect( () => {
		if ( error ) {
			alert( error );
		}
	}, [error] )

	// ...
}
```

> Great! `DeletePageButton` is now fully aware of errors (even if `alert` is not the prettiest way to communicate them).

Reviewer 2: I love how we're demonstrating that we can get the error if the request to delete fails, but I almost feel like this is too much of a behavior we want to avoid to include it in the official docs. The attached screenshot tells the story enough on its own I think: there's no useful or actionable information present in that message and it's impact will be spreading fear when nobody can do anything about it.

If we want to show error handling I have these questions:
 - what kind of errors should we expect to get? not conceptually, but what is the return value of `getLastEntityDeleteError`? not great that we recreated C-style "get last error" calling patterns, but if we do that, can we at least expect some error codes or stable strings?
 - how would we ideally communicate the error to the person at the screen? this doc has great examples of using spinners and indicators to communicate where in the process we are, but for errors we are kinda just dropping the ball and giving up. could we use a Toast message of some kind to indicate the failure?
 - how should we respond after failure? retry? disable some control? even a helpful string message as used on invalid form fields could provide more actionable information.

if these docs didn't have the power to establish patterns and guide people's habits I wouldn't consider this as big of a deal, but I think we should write these with the idea that whatever we put out there is what we are telling the community we want to see. it would be worth removing this section or investing a little more in it to set a good example.

Author: Good point! I followed the same pattern as the rest of WordPress and added Snackbar displaying the `error.message`.

# Adding a delete button

> This part is about adding a *Delete* feature to our app. Here's a glimpse of what we're going to build:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this section we're going to be adding a *Delete* feature to our app. Here's a glimpse of what we're going to build:
```

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/WordPress/gutenberg/HEAD/docs/how-to-guides/data-basics/media/delete-button/delete-button.png)

### Step 1: Add a _Delete_ button

Let's start by creating the `DeletePageButton` component and updating the user interface of our `PagesList` component:

```js
import { Button } from '@wordpress/components';
import { decodeEntities } from '@wordpress/html-entities';

const DeletePageButton = () => (
	<Button variant="primary">
		Delete
	</Button>
)

function PagesList( { hasResolved, pages } ) {
	if ( ! hasResolved ) {
		return <Spinner />;
	}
	if ( ! pages?.length ) {
		return <div>No results</div>;
	}

	return (
		<table className="wp-list-table widefat fixed striped table-view-list">
			<thead>
				<tr>
					<td>Title</td>
					<td style={{width: 190}}>Actions</td>
				</tr>
			</thead>
			<tbody>
				{ pages?.map( ( page ) => (
					<tr key={page.id}>
						<td>{ decodeEntities( page.title.rendered ) }</td>
						<td>
							<div className="form-buttons">
								<EditPageButton pageId={ page.id } />
								<DeletePageButton pageId={ page.id } />
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
				) ) }
			</tbody>
		</table>
	);
}
```

> This is how the PagesList should look like now:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is what the PagesList should look like now:
```

We'll need the `isDeletingEntityRecord` selector for that. It is similar to the `isSavingEntityRecord` selector we've already seen in [part 3](/docs/how-to-guides/data-basics/3-building-an-edit-form.md): it returns `true` or `false` and never issues any HTTP requests:

```js
const DeletePageButton = ({ pageId }) => {
	// ...
	const { isDeleting } = useSelect(
		select => ({
			isDeleting: select( coreDataStore ).isDeletingEntityRecord( 'postType', 'page', pageId ),
		}),
		[ pageId ]
	)
	return (
		<Button variant="primary" onClick={ handleDelete } disabled={ isDeleting }>
			{ isDeleting ? (
				<>
					<Spinner />
					Deleting...
				</>
			) : 'Delete' }
		</Button>
	);
}
```

Here's what it looks like in action:

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/WordPress/gutenberg/HEAD/docs/how-to-guides/data-basics/media/delete-button/deleting-in-progress.png)

### Step 4: Handle errors

We optimistically assumed that a *delete* operation would always succeed. Unfortunately, under the hood, it is a REST API request that can fail in many ways:

* The website can be down
* The update may be invalid

> * The page could have been deleted by someone else in the meantime

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The website can be down.
* The update may be invalid.
* The page could have been deleted by someone else in the meantime.
```

```

Here's how we can apply it in `DeletePageButton`:

```js
import { useEffect } from '@wordpress/element';
const DeletePageButton = ({ pageId }) => {
	// ...
	const { error, /* ... */ } = useSelect(
		select => ( {
			error: select( coreDataStore ).getLastEntityDeleteError( 'postType', 'page', pageId ),
			// ...
		} ),
		[pageId]
	);
	useEffect( () => {
		if ( error ) {
			// Display the error
		}
	}, [error] )

	// ...
}
```

The `error` object comes from the `@wordpress/api-fetch` and contains information about the failure reason. It has the following properties:

* `message` – a human-readable error message such as `Invalid post ID`.
* `code` – a string-based error code such as `rest_post_invalid_id`. To learn about all possible error codes you'd need to refer to the [`/v2/pages` endpoint's source code](https://github.com/WordPress/wordpress-develop/blob/2648a5f984b8abf06872151898e3a61d3458a628/src/wp-includes/rest-api/endpoints/class-wp-rest-revisions-controller.php#L226-L230).
* `data` (optional) – error details, contains the `code` property containing the HTTP response code for the failed request.

In this tutorial, we will display the `error.message` to the user.

> In WordPress, there is an established patterns of displaying status information using the `Snackbar` component:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In WordPress, there is an established pattern of displaying status information using the `Snackbar` component:
```

		<div>
			{/* ... */}
			<SnackbarNotices />
		</div>
	);
}
```

Now we're ready to tell the user about any errors that may have occurred.

```js
import { useEffect } from '@wordpress/element';
const DeletePageButton = ({ pageId }) => {
	const { deleteEntityRecord } = useDispatch( coreDataStore );
	// ...
	const { error, /* ... */ } = useSelect(
		select => ( {
			error: select( coreDataStore ).getLastEntityDeleteError( 'postType', 'page', pageId ),
			// ...
		} ),
		[pageId]
	);
	useEffect( () => {
		if ( error ) {
			// Display the error
		}
	}, [error] )

	// ...
}
function DeletePageButton( { pageId } ) {
	const { createErrorNotice } = useDispatch( noticesStore );
	// ...
	const { error, isDeleting } = useSelect(
		select => ( {
			error: select( coreDataStore ).getLastEntityDeleteError( 'postType', 'page', pageId ),
			isDeleting: select( coreDataStore ).isDeletingEntityRecord( 'postType', 'page', pageId ),
		} ),
		[ pageId ]
	);

	useEffect( () => {
		if ( error ) {
			const message = ( error?.message || 'There was an error.' ) + ' Please refresh the page and try again.'
			createErrorNotice( , {
				type: 'snackbar',
			} );
		}
	}, [ error ] )
    // ...
}
```

> Great! `DeletePageButton` is now fully aware of errors. Let's see that error message in action. We'll trigger an invalid delete and let it fail. One way to do it is to set the `id` to `-1`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Great! `DeletePageButton` is now fully aware of errors. Let's see that error message in action. We'll trigger an invalid delete and let it fail. One way to do this is to set the `id` to `-1`:
```

```js
export function DeletePageButton( { pageId, onCancel, onSaveFinished } ) {
	// ...

> 	pageId = pageId * -1;

Reviewer 3: Nit: this is actually negating the ID (i.e. `8` would become `-8` rather than setting to `-1` as you say above 🤔

Author: I just updated the description.

	const handleDelete = () => deleteEntityRecord( 'postType', 'page', pageId );
	// ...
}
```

Once you refresh the page and click any `Delete` button, you should see the following error message:

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/WordPress/gutenberg/HEAD/docs/how-to-guides/data-basics/media/delete-button/snackbar-error.png)
![](./media/delete-button/snackbar-error.png)

Fantastic! We can now **remove the `pageId = pageId * -1;` line.**

Before we move on to the next step, let's also confirm a successful deletion with another snackbar message:

```js

function DeletePageButton( { pageId } ) {
	const { deleteEntityRecord } = useDispatch( coreDataStore );
	const { createSuccessNotice, createErrorNotice } = useDispatch( noticesStore );
	const handleDelete = async () => {
		const success = await deleteEntityRecord( 'postType', 'page', pageId );
		if ( success ) {
			createSuccessNotice( "The page was deleted!", {
				type: 'snackbar',
			} );

> 		}

Reviewer 3: This does feel like an unusual pattern. 

The "success" status is checked by awaiting the result of the Promise but the error case is handled somewhere completely different. 

If I was looking at this in isolation I'd be thinking that the developer isn't handling the error state.

Author: I just fixed that, hopefully it rings better now!

	}
	// ...
}
```

Here's what you should see after applying these changes and deleting a page:

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/WordPress/gutenberg/HEAD/docs/how-to-guides/data-basics/media/delete-button/snackbar-success.png)
![](./media/delete-button/snackbar-success.png)

And that's it!

### Wiring it all together

All the pieces are in place, great! Here’s all the changes we've made in this chapter:

```js
import { useSelect, useDispatch } from '@wordpress/data';
import { useState, useEffect } from '@wordpress/element';
import { Button, Modal, TextControl } from '@wordpress/components';

function MyFirstApp() {
	const [searchTerm, setSearchTerm] = useState( '' );
	const { pages, hasResolved } = useSelect(
		( select ) => {
			const query = {};
			if ( searchTerm ) {
				query.search = searchTerm;
			}
			const selectorArgs = ['postType', 'page', query];
			const pages = (
				select( coreDataStore )
					.getEntityRecords( ...selectorArgs )

> 					?.filter( page => ! select( coreDataStore ).isDeletingEntityRecord('postType', 'page', page.id ) )

Reviewer 3: This is making sure we're not displayed any pages currently being deleted right?

Author: Good spot! I just removed it.

# Adding a delete button

In this section, we will add a *Delete* feature to our app. Here's a glimpse of what we're going to build:

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/WordPress/gutenberg/HEAD/docs/how-to-guides/data-basics/media/delete-button/delete-button.png)

### Step 1: Add a _Delete_ button

Let's start by creating the `DeletePageButton` component and updating the user interface of our `PagesList` component:

```js
import { Button } from '@wordpress/components';
import { decodeEntities } from '@wordpress/html-entities';

const DeletePageButton = () => (
	<Button variant="primary">
		Delete
	</Button>
)

function PagesList( { hasResolved, pages } ) {
	if ( ! hasResolved ) {
		return <Spinner />;
	}
	if ( ! pages?.length ) {
		return <div>No results</div>;
	}

	return (
		<table className="wp-list-table widefat fixed striped table-view-list">
			<thead>
				<tr>
					<td>Title</td>
					<td style={{width: 190}}>Actions</td>
				</tr>
			</thead>
			<tbody>
				{ pages?.map( ( page ) => (
					<tr key={page.id}>
						<td>{ decodeEntities( page.title.rendered ) }</td>
						<td>
							<div className="form-buttons">
								<EditPageButton pageId={ page.id } />

> 								<DeletePageButton pageId={ page.id } />

Reviewer 4: It would be cool if we had a way to highlight the addition somehow.

Author: I know, right? Maybe I could add a comment like 

``` This is the addition v```

Or! Use the `diff` format 

```diff
	<div className="form-buttons">
		<EditPageButton pageId={ page.id } />
+		<DeletePageButton pageId={ page.id } />
```

Author: Hm on a second thought, the handbook probably wouldn't correctly render a diff.

Author: I went for
```
{/* ↓ This is the only change in the PagesList component */}
<DeletePageButton pageId={ page.id }/>
{/* ↑ This is the only change in the PagesList component */}
```

							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
				) ) }
			</tbody>
		</table>
	);
}
```

This is what the PagesList should look like now:

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/WordPress/gutenberg/HEAD/docs/how-to-guides/data-basics/media/delete-button/delete-button.png)

### Step 2: Wire the button to a delete action

In Gutenberg data, we delete entity records from the WordPress REST API using the `deleteEntityRecord` action. It sends the request, processes the result, and updates the cached data in the Redux state.

> Here's how you can try it in your browser's dev tools:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Here's how you can try deleting entity records in your browser's dev tools:
```

```js
// We need a valid page ID to call deleteEntityRecord, so let's get the first available one using getEntityRecords.
const pageId = wp.data.select( 'core' ).getEntityRecords( 'postType', 'page' )[0].id;

// Now let's delete that page:
const promise = wp.data.dispatch( 'core' ).deleteEntityRecord( 'postType', 'page', pageId );

// promise gets resolved or rejected when the API request succeeds or fails.
```

> Once the REST API request is finished, you will notice one of the pages has disappeared from the list. This is because that list is populated by using `useSelect()` and the `select( coreDataStore ).getEntityRecords( 'postType', 'page' )` selector. Anytime the underlying data changes, the list gets re-rendered with fresh data. That's pretty convenient!

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Once the REST API request is finished, you will notice one of the pages has disappeared from the list. This is because that list is populated by the `useSelect()` hook and the `select( coreDataStore ).getEntityRecords( 'postType', 'page' )` selector. Anytime the underlying data changes, the list gets re-rendered with fresh data. That's pretty convenient!
```

```js
const DeletePageButton = ({ pageId }) => {
	const { deleteEntityRecord } = useDispatch( coreDataStore );
	const handleDelete = () => deleteEntityRecord( 'postType', 'page', pageId );
	return (
		<Button variant="primary" onClick={ handleDelete }>
			Delete
		</Button>
	);
}
```

### Step 3: Add visual feedback

It may take a few moments for the REST API request to finish after clicking the _Delete_ button. Let's communicate that with a `<Spinner />` component similarly to what we did in the previous parts of this tutorial.

We'll need the `isDeletingEntityRecord` selector for that. It is similar to the `isSavingEntityRecord` selector we've already seen in [part 3](/docs/how-to-guides/data-basics/3-building-an-edit-form.md): it returns `true` or `false` and never issues any HTTP requests:

```js
const DeletePageButton = ({ pageId }) => {
	// ...
	const { isDeleting } = useSelect(
		select => ({
			isDeleting: select( coreDataStore ).isDeletingEntityRecord( 'postType', 'page', pageId ),
		}),
		[ pageId ]
	)
	return (
		<Button variant="primary" onClick={ handleDelete } disabled={ isDeleting }>
			{ isDeleting ? (
				<>
					<Spinner />

> 					Deleting...

Reviewer 4: Maybe for the sake of good practice we should use `__( string )` for strings? Maybe it's too much for this tutorial tho.

Author: @scruffian have already mentioned that – I'd like to spin another PR to update all the parts of this tutorial at once.

				</>
			) : 'Delete' }
		</Button>
	);
}
```

Here's what it looks like in action:

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/WordPress/gutenberg/HEAD/docs/how-to-guides/data-basics/media/delete-button/deleting-in-progress.png)

### Step 4: Handle errors

We optimistically assumed that a *delete* operation would always succeed. Unfortunately, under the hood, it is a REST API request that can fail in many ways:

* The website can be down.

> * The update may be invalid.

Reviewer 4: What update?

Author: Good catch! I copied that from the "update" part of the tutorial :D

* The page could have been deleted by someone else in the meantime.

> To tell the user when any of these happens, we need to extract the error information using the `getLastEntityDeleteError` selector:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To tell the user when any of these errors happen, we need to extract the error information using the `getLastEntityDeleteError` selector:
```

```js

> // Replace 9 with an actual page ID

Reviewer 4: This is a bit confusing. Why not use a placeholder instead of this comment about the magic number?

Author: How would you introduce a placeholder that would clearly communicate that?

Author: I left the placeholder for now, I'm happy to revisit later on, though!

wp.data.select( 'core' ).getLastEntityDeleteError( 'postType', 'page', 9 )
```

Here's how we can apply it in `DeletePageButton`:

```js
import { useEffect } from '@wordpress/element';
const DeletePageButton = ({ pageId }) => {
	// ...
	const { error, /* ... */ } = useSelect(
		select => ( {
			error: select( coreDataStore ).getLastEntityDeleteError( 'postType', 'page', pageId ),
			// ...
		} ),
		[pageId]
	);
	useEffect( () => {
		if ( error ) {
			// Display the error
		}
	}, [error] )

	// ...
}
```

> The `error` object comes from the `@wordpress/api-fetch` and contains information about the failure reason. It has the following properties:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The `error` object comes from the `@wordpress/api-fetch` and contains information about the error. It has the following properties:
```

* `message` – a human-readable error message such as `Invalid post ID`.
* `code` – a string-based error code such as `rest_post_invalid_id`. To learn about all possible error codes you'd need to refer to the [`/v2/pages` endpoint's source code](https://github.com/WordPress/wordpress-develop/blob/2648a5f984b8abf06872151898e3a61d3458a628/src/wp-includes/rest-api/endpoints/class-wp-rest-revisions-controller.php#L226-L230).
* `data` (optional) – error details, contains the `code` property containing the HTTP response code for the failed request.

> There are many ways to turn that data into an error message, but in this tutorial, we will display the `error.message`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
There are many ways to turn that object into an error message, but in this tutorial, we will display the `error.message`.
```

> WordPress has an established pattern of displaying status information using the `Snackbar` component. Here's what it looks like **in the Widgets editor**:

Reviewer 4: Why the emphasis?

Author: The screenshot isn't from the plugin we're building so I'm hoping to avoid confusion "wait, what is this screen?"

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/WordPress/gutenberg/HEAD/docs/how-to-guides/data-basics/media/delete-button/deleting-in-progress.png)
![](./media/delete-button/snackbar-example.png)

Let's use the same type of notifications in our plugin! There are two parts to this:

1. Displaying notifications
2. Dispatching notifications

#### Displaying notifications

Our application only knows how to display pages but does not know how to display notifications. Let's tell it!

> The [`Snackbar` WordPress component](https://wordpress.github.io/gutenberg/?path=/story/components-snackbar--default) represents a single notification:

Reviewer 4: The jump from let's tell it! to here are two new components seems to sudden. Maybe a sentence about how we can use these components such and such would do, and then explain what eachone does.

Author: Good point, added!

		</div>
	);
}
```

This tutorial is focused on managing the pages and won't discuss the above snippet in detail. If you're interested in the details of `@wordpress/notices`, the [handbook page](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/reference-guides/data/data-core-notices/) is a good place to start.

Now we're ready to tell the user about any errors that may have occurred.

#### Dispatching notifications

With the SnackbarNotices component in place, we're ready to dispatch some notifications! Here's how:

```js
import { store as noticesStore } from '@wordpress/notices';
import { useEffect } from '@wordpress/element';
function DeletePageButton( { pageId } ) {
	const { createSuccessNotice, createErrorNotice } = useDispatch( noticesStore );
	// useSelect returns a list of selectors if you pass the store handle
	// instead of a callback:
	const { getLastEntityDeleteError } = useSelect( coreDataStore )
	const handleDelete = async () => {
		const success = await deleteEntityRecord( 'postType', 'page', pageId);
		if ( success ) {
			// Tell the user the operation succeeded:
			createSuccessNotice( "The page was deleted!", {
				type: 'snackbar',
			} );
		} else {

> 			// We use the selector directly to get the error at this point in time.

Reviewer 4: This still mysterious and I think the comment makes things worse :)

Author: I agree, I replaced it with

```
			// We use the selector directly to get the fresh error *after* the deleteEntityRecord
			// have failed.
```

			// Imagine we fetched the error like this:
			//     const { lastError } = useSelect( function() { /* ... */ } );
			// Then, lastError would be null inside of handleDelete.
			// Why? Because we'd refer to the version of it that was computed
			// before the handleDelete was even called.
			const lastError = getLastEntityDeleteError( 'postType', 'page', pageId );
			const message = ( lastError?.message || 'There was an error.' ) + ' Please refresh the page and try again.'

> 			// Tell the user how exactly the operation have failed:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
			// Tell the user how exactly the operation has failed:
```
